YOUR TANDY HAS ANOTHER VOICE

Three notes, a drum, and one more tune

The familiar Tandy sound generator has three square-wave tone channels
and one noise channel. That is four channels, but only three independent
ordinary pitched tones. The noise channel is useful percussion, not an
unrestricted fourth melody channel.

On the Tandy 1000 EX, the technical reference describes those four
generators summed with the external signal from PIT counter 2. The PC
speaker timer can therefore add another pitched square wave. This is
EX-specific routing evidence: check another model's schematic before
assuming its speaker, jack, gates and mute controls work the same way.

A tone is cheap; a recording is not

Load a divider into PIT channel 2 and the hardware makes the repeated
waveform. Your program changes it at note boundaries, not every sample.
The accompanying VOICE demo uses the existing cooperative DOS adapter:

    DosSoundAcquire(DS_PSG|DS_PIT);
    DosSoundPitNote(72,1);       /* C5, explicit attack */
    DosSoundPitNote(0,0);       /* off */
    DosSoundRelease();

Check every return value; the complete source does. The melody API
accepts MIDI notes 45..96. Its plain pitched mode is separate from PWM
sampled speech, which repeatedly reloads the timer thousands of times
per second. Do not mistake a cheap fourth melody for cheap recorded
voices. Speaker tone and sampled speech share channel 2 and cannot own
it simultaneously.

Expression without a new waveform

The PSG's oscillator stays square. Software can make its attack, decay
and release sound different by scheduling attenuation changes. Delayed
vibrato changes the pitch divider by small amounts. Neither operation
turns it into a sampled instrument or a physical choir.

VOICE 3 holds one note, applies a short envelope, then starts vibrato.
It never restarts the note merely to change volume. The foreground
scheduler uses ordinary BIOS ticks, about 55 milliseconds apart. That
is a deliberately coarse musical clock; it is not sample timing. The
CPU waits with HLT between ticks. No timer-0 divisor or hardware IRQ
handler is changed. Applications can do other work between sound steps.

Volume has an off step

Each PSG channel has its own attenuation: 0 is loudest, 1..14 add nominal
2 dB steps, and 15 is off. Attenuation 14 is the last finite level, not
15. Adding a fade requires clamping and an explicit terminal mute.
The extra PIT melody has fixed hardware amplitude and binary on/off;
it has no equivalent PSG attenuation register. Desktop mixer gains do
not prove the same balance at the EX's electrically summed speaker.

Noise is a musical tradeoff

Select periodic or white noise, then select one of three fixed clock
rates or the tone-3 clock. Fixed-rate white noise can suggest hats and
snares; periodic noise can give a buzzy percussion accent. Writing the
noise control resets its sequence, so write it for an attack, not for
every volume fade. Tone-3-clocked noise follows that tone's divider:
changing the third melodic voice also changes the percussion clock.
Using that mode costs independence, even though both outputs can sound.

VOICE 2 alternates a periodic accent and white-noise hat. It uses fixed
rates so no melodic divider is borrowed. Its volume fades without
rewriting noise control. VOICE 1 adds a PIT melody over three PSG tones.
Run VOICE with no argument for all three short, original examples.

Leave the machine quiet

Run from plain DOS on a known-compatible Tandy. Escape or Ctrl-C stops.
The adapter refuses Windows sessions and an already active speaker;
errors and normal completion release the owner and mute owned sound.
It preserves unrelated port-61 control bits and touches PIT channel 2
only. A cooperative lease is not universal protection against a TSR,
BIOS beep or unrelated program that writes the ports behind its back.
Do not run competing sound programs. This kit installs no driver.

Sources: Tandy 1000 EX Technical Reference (1986), Cat.25-1510,
p.32, Sound (routing); Texas Instruments, SN76489AN manual
(registers, attenuation, tone and noise); the pinned DOSSND/PITCORE
implementation supplied with this kit. REFS.TXT records scope.
Emulator qualification is reported separately. No physical choir or
physical EX listening test is claimed.
